DOCSP-28003: Array Operations (#349)
mongodb/docs-java: source/fundamentals/aggregation/aggregation-expression-operations.txt

     - :manual:`$filter </reference/operator/aggregation/filter/>`

   * - `first() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#first()>`__
     - :manual:`$first </reference/operator/aggregation/first/>`

   * - `last() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#last()>`__
     - :manual:`$last </reference/operator/aggregation/last/>`

   * - `map() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#map(java.util.function.Function)>`__
     - :manual:`$map </reference/operator/aggregation/map/>`

   * - `size() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#size()>`__
     - :manual:`$size </reference/operator/aggregation/size/>`

   * - `slice() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#slice(int,int)>`__
     - :manual:`$slice </reference/operator/aggregation/slice/>`

.. include:: /includes/fundamentals/agg-mql-diff.rst

Suppose you have a collection of movies, each of which contains an array
of nested documents for upcoming showtimes. Each nested document

> also contains the total number of seats in the theater and number of

Reviewer: [nitpick]

Slight tweak - take or leave as you see fit. :) 

```suggestion
also contains the total number of seats in the theater and the number of
```

     - :manual:`$filter </reference/operator/aggregation/filter/>`

   * - `first() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#first()>`__
     - :manual:`$first </reference/operator/aggregation/first/>`

   * - `last() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#last()>`__
     - :manual:`$last </reference/operator/aggregation/last/>`

   * - `map() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#map(java.util.function.Function)>`__
     - :manual:`$map </reference/operator/aggregation/map/>`

   * - `size() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#size()>`__
     - :manual:`$size </reference/operator/aggregation/size/>`

   * - `slice() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#slice(int,int)>`__
     - :manual:`$slice </reference/operator/aggregation/slice/>`

.. include:: /includes/fundamentals/agg-mql-diff.rst

Suppose you have documents describing upcoming events that you might want

> to sign up for. Each event document contains an array of nested

Author: Good idea - I can transition this to be films with showtimes or something similar! Will workshop

> documents corresponding to each date that the event is hosted.

Author: changed the paragraph

> Each nested document also contains the number of available seats and

Reviewer: [suggestion]

Adding some clarity because "available seats" could be taken to mean the number of seats not currently claimed.

```suggestion
Each nested document also contains the total number of seats for the venue and the
```

> current number of sign-ups for that date's event. You want to only see

Reviewer: [grammar]

Misplaced modifier

```suggestion
current number of sign-ups for that date's event. You want to see only
```

Author: I'll get a hang of this eventually...

events that still have open seats.

To find the number of open seats for an event, subtract the ``signups``
field from the ``seats`` field by using the ``subtract()`` method. To

> filter only for events with open seats, pass a predicate to the

Reviewer: [suggestion]

I think "only" is unnecessary here.

```suggestion
filter for events with open seats, pass a predicate to the
```

> ``filter()`` method that checks if the difference between ``seats`` and
> ``signups`` is greater than ``0`` by using the ``gt()`` method. To

Reviewer: [suggestion]

I think this is repetitive with the previous sentence since you already defined how you find the number of open seats. Recommend changing this to tighten the language.

```suggestion
``filter()`` method that checks if the number of open seats
is greater than ``0`` by using the ``gt()`` method. To
```

output the events with open seats as the ``hasOpenSeats`` array, use the
``project()`` method.

The following code shows the pipeline stage for this aggregation:

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

   Arrays.asList(project(fields(
                   computed("hasOpenSeats",
                           current()
                                   .<MqlDocument>getArray("events")
                                   .filter(e -> e
                                           .getInteger("seats")
                                           .subtract(e
                                                   .getInteger("signups"))
                                           .gt(of(0)))
   ))));

.. note:: Referencing Nested Documents and Fields

   The preceding example references the ``seats`` and ``signups`` fields,
   which are in nested documents in the ``events`` array. To access
   these fields, you must specify that the return type of ``getArray()``

>    is an ``MqlArray`` of ``MqlDocument`` values when retrieving the
>    ``events`` array.

Reviewer: [suggestion]

I think you could remove this, but totally up to you.

```suggestion
   is an ``MqlArray`` of ``MqlDocument`` values.
```

   from the Query API expression provided in each example. However,
   both expressions will produce the same aggregation result.

.. important::

   The driver does not provide methods for all aggregation pipeline operators in
   the Query API. If you need to use an unsupported operation in an
   aggregation, you can create an expression as a BSON ``Document``
   type. To learn more about the ``Document`` type, see :ref:`<fundamentals-documents>`.

Array Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can perform an array operation on a value of type ``MqlArray``
using the methods described in this section.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60

   * - Java Method
     - Aggregation Pipeline Operator

   * - `all() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#all(java.util.function.Function)>`__
     - :manual:`$allElementsTrue </reference/operator/aggregation/allElementsTrue/>`

>    * - `any() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#any(java.util.function.Function)>`__

Reviewer 2: It might be helpful to include an example with any (or all or sum or joinStrings) - I'm not sure if the syntax for these is obvious. For example:

```
totalTicketsSold ... current().<MqlDocument>getArray("showtimes")
    .sum(e -> e.getInteger("ticketsSold"))
```

(I don't think this should replace the existing example.) The syntax is especially odd when the method does not "perform a mapping". For example,

```
current().<MqlInteger>getArray("myNumbers") // [1, 2, 4, 9...]
    .sum(n -> n)
```

Here, the user might expect to be able to write just `.sum()`, but for technical reasons this was not possible to implement. It's not obvious why one would need to write `n -> n`, and it might feel like an annoying trick or surprise. I have trouble coming up with a realistic example of the above (maybe it should just be a note - "The type system requires that certain operations ...require you to pass in an identity function, for example `.sum(n -> n)`").

Author: adapted the example. LMK if it is too complicated now

Reviewer 2: Looks good to me. Having a more complex example seems to fit this section. I tried to make it more legible by breaking out some variables.

tickets, pass a predicate to the ``filter()`` method that checks if the
number of available tickets is greater than ``0`` by using the ``gt()``
method. To output the showtimes with available tickets as the
``hasTicketsAvailable`` array, use the ``project()`` method.

The following code shows the pipeline stage for this aggregation:

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

   Arrays.asList(project(fields(
                   computed("hasTicketsAvailable",
                           current()
                                   .<MqlDocument>getArray("showtimes")
                                   .filter(e -> e
                                           .getInteger("seats")
                                           .subtract(e
                                                   .getInteger("ticketsBought"))
                                           .gt(of(0)))
   ))));

.. note:: Referencing Nested Documents and Fields

   The preceding example references the ``seats`` and ``ticketsBought`` fields,
   which are in nested documents in the ``showtimes`` array. To access
   these fields, you must specify that the return type of ``getArray()``

>    is an ``MqlArray`` of ``MqlDocument`` values.

Author: What do you mean by Documents section?

>    is an ``MqlArray`` of ``MqlDocument`` values.

Author: will include the note in the future Document PR - need to create the anchor, etc.

     - :manual:`$sum </reference/operator/aggregation/sum/>`

   * - `unionArrays() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlArray.html#unionArrays(java.util.function.Function)>`__
     - :manual:`$setUnion </reference/operator/aggregation/setUnion/>`

.. include:: /includes/fundamentals/agg-mql-diff.rst

Suppose you have a collection of movies, each of which contains an array
of nested documents for upcoming showtimes. Each nested document
contains an array that represents the total number of seats in the
theater, where the first array entry is the number of premium seats and
the second entry is the number of regular seats. Each nested document
also contains the number of tickets that have already been bought for
the showtime. A document in this collection might resemble the
following:

.. code-block:: json
   :copyable: false

   {
     "_id": ...,
     "movie": "Hamlet",
     "showtimes": [
       {
         "date": "May 14, 2023, 12:00 PM",
         "seats": [ 20, 80 ],
         "ticketsBought": 100
       },
       {
         "date": "May 20, 2023, 08:00 PM",
         "seats": [ 10, 40 ],
         "ticketsBought": 34
       }
     ]
   }

> You want to see only showtimes that still have available tickets.
> You can calculate the total number of seats by taking the sum of the
> ``seats`` array by using the ``sum()`` method. To
> filter for showtimes with available tickets, pass a predicate to the
> ``filter()`` method that checks if ``ticketsBought`` is less
> than the total number of seats by using the ``lt()``
> method. To output the showtimes with available tickets as the
> ``availableShowtimes`` array, use the ``project()`` method.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To see only showtimes with available tickets, pass a predicate to the
``filter()`` method.
Within this predicate, calculate the total number of seats by taking the sum of the
``seats`` array by using the ``sum()`` method. 
Check if ``ticketsBought`` is less
than the total number of seats by using the ``lt()``
method. To output the showtimes with available tickets as the
``availableShowtimes`` array, use the ``project()`` method.
```

Rearranged because the total calculation is performed inside ("after") the predicate. The rearrangement made the first line redundant.

Might add a note like: "To increase legibility, this example assigns intermediary results to the totalSeats and isAvailable variables. Inlining the variables produces equivalent results." since readers might be surprised to see variables, and wonder if they really work as intended.

The following code shows the pipeline stage for this aggregation:

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

>    Arrays.asList(project(fields(
>            computed("availableShowtimes",
>                    current()
>                            .<MqlDocument>getArray("showtimes")
>                            .filter(s -> s.getInteger("ticketsBought")
>                                    .lt(s.<MqlInteger>getArray("seats").sum(n -> n)))
>    ))));

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Arrays.asList(project(fields(
            computed("availableShowtimes", current()
                    .<MqlDocument>getArray("showtimes")
                    .filter(showtime -> {
                        var totalSeats = showtime
                                .<MqlInteger>getArray("seats")
                                .sum(n -> n);
                        var isAvailable = showtime
                                .getInteger("ticketsBought")
                                .lt(totalSeats);
                        return isAvailable;
                    })
            )
    )));
```

The following code provides an equivalent aggregation pipeline in
the Query API:

.. code-block:: javascript
   :copyable: true

   [
     {
       $project: {
         availableShowtimes: {
           $filter: {
             input: "$showtimes",

>              as: "s",
>              cond: { $lt: [ "$$s.ticketsBought", { $sum: "$$s.seats" } ] } } } }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
             as: "showtime",
             cond: { $lt: [ "$$s.ticketsBought", { $sum: "$$showtime.seats" } ] } } } }
```
for consistency with above

method. Check if ``ticketsBought`` is less than the total number of
seats by using the ``lt()`` method. To output the showtimes with
available tickets as the ``availableShowtimes`` array, use the
``project()`` method.

The following code shows the pipeline stage for this aggregation:

.. code-block:: java
   :copyable: true

   Arrays.asList(project(fields(
           computed("availableShowtimes",
                   current()
                           .<MqlDocument>getArray("showtimes")
                           .filter(showtime -> {
                               var totalSeats = showtime
                                       .<MqlInteger>getArray("seats")
                                       .sum(n -> n);
                               var isAvailable = showtime
                                       .getInteger("ticketsBought")
                                       .lt(totalSeats);
                               return isAvailable;
                           })
   ))));

.. note::

   To improve readability, the previous example assigns intermediary values to
   the ``totalSeats`` and ``isAvailable`` variables. If you define the

>    variables in-line, the code produces equivalent results.

Author: Rephrased

   * - `or() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlBoolean.html#or(com.mongodb.client.model.mql.MqlBoolean)>`__
     - :manual:`$or </reference/operator/aggregation/or/>`

   * - `cond() <{+api+}/apidocs/mongodb-driver-core/com/mongodb/client/model/mql/MqlBoolean.html#cond(T,T)>`__

>      - :manual:`$cond </reference/operator/aggregation/cond/>`

Author: Since i have made changes to the already-merged Boolean section in this PR, I figured I would just remove this table item too.

>      - :manual:`$cond </reference/operator/aggregation/cond/>`

Author: I made those changes to adapt the Boolean section to the format in the String section.

>      - :manual:`$cond </reference/operator/aggregation/cond/>`

Reviewer 2: Alright, I'll ignore this section's changes.
